[PXCT-101][PC-1676] Update Portenta X8 User Manual (#2249)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/04.pro/boards/portenta-x8/tutorials/01.user-manual/content.md

Reviewer: LGTM! this had to be difficult. Good job

Once the setup is complete, the browser page will automatically switch to the Arduino Linux Wizard page.

The Arduino Linux Wizard page is accessible at [**http://localhost:8080**](http://localhost:8080). You can use this link to open the Arduino Linux Wizard dashboard anytime.

![Arduino Linux Wizard Home Screen](assets/OOTB_homepage_init.png "Arduino Linux Wizard Home Screen")

The **SYSTEM INFO** button is located at the bottom left corner of the Arduino Linux Wizard page.

![Arduino Linux Wizard System Info](assets/OOTB_system_info.png "Arduino Linux Wizard System Info")

This section displays details about the Portenta X8, such as hardware and software specifications, network status, and active containers.

If you disconnect the Portenta X8 and need to reopen the Arduino Linux Wizard page, use the command line and run the TCP port forwarding command:

```bash
adb forward tcp:8080 tcp:80
```

Then, access the page with [**http://localhost:8080**](http://localhost:8080) to open the Arduino Linux Wizard dashboard.

#### Wi-Fi® Configuration

> Click **Wi-Fi® Connection** to start configuring your network connectivity. Otherwise, you can connect your Portenta X8 to the Internet through an Ethernet cable using a USB-C® hub with an RJ45 port or a Portenta Carrier. In this tutorial, Wi-Fi® connectivity will be used.

Reviewer 2: Let's mention that you can connect the board also via cellular connectivity with a Portenta Carrier and 4G Module.

Reviewer 3: Updated!

![Arduino Linux Wizard Python-Alpine Shell](assets/OOTB_alpine_shell.png "Arduino Linux Wizard Python-Alpine Shell")

## Portenta X8 OS Image Update

It is recommended that you check every now and then to see if your Portenta X8 image version is up to date to have the latest security updates.

***To review the image version history, refer to the [__Portenta X8 firmware release notes__](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/x8-firmware-release-notes/).***

There are four ways to update your Portenta X8 are described:

* [Update for OS release V.399](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/image-flashing/#update-for-os-release-v399)
* [Update through Arduino Linux Wizard experience](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/image-flashing/#update-through-arduino-linux-wizard-experience)
* [Update through Portenta X8 Manager in your Arduino Cloud for Business account (available for all OS releases)](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/image-flashing/#update-with-portenta-x8-board-manager)
* [Update using the `uuu` tool (compatible with custom images)](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/image-flashing/#update-using-uuu-tool)

> You can find more details in the dedicated tutorial here: [**How To Flash Your Portenta X8**](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/image-flashing).

Reviewer 2: Please rename the tutorial "How to Flash Your Portenta X8" with "How To Update Your Portenta X8"

Reviewer 3: Updated!

![Arduino Linux Wizard Homepage](assets/OOTB_homepage.png "Arduino Linux Wizard Homepage")

Now, you can type `adb shell` to start communicating with your Portenta X8.

![ADB shell command](assets/adb-shell-command.png "ADB shell command")

As it is a Linux device, you can create files, change directories, etc.

To gain admin (root) access, type `sudo su -`. The terminal prefix should turn red.

![ADB shell with admin access](assets/adb-sudo-su.png "ADB shell with admin access")

You can now freely program your Portenta X8 Linux OS. In the sections below, you can check out some basic commands to get started.

### Manage Your Network Via CLI

To connect to a Wi-Fi® Access Point via CLI, you can use the network manager tool **nmcli**. These are some of the most used commands:

* `nmcli device wifi connect <SSID> password <PASSWORD>` to connect to a specific SSID
* `nmcli de` to check the connection status
* `nmcli connection show` to visualize the active network interfaces (and their types) on your Portenta X8

### Accessing Over SSH Session

> Establishing communication with the Portenta X8 via an SSH session is possible. To do so, a network connection is needed, either over Wi-Fi® or Ethernet. Using a device with DHCP server capabilities, such as a network router, is recommended for Ethernet connections. After setting up the network connection and DHCP, the Portenta X8 will be ready for SSH communication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Establishing communication with the Portenta X8 via an SSH session is possible. To do so, a network connection is needed, either over Wi-Fi® , cellular or Ethernet. Using a device with DHCP server capabilities, such as a network router, is recommended for Ethernet connections. After setting up the network connection and DHCP, the Portenta X8 will be ready for SSH communication.
```

| **Error code** | **Meaning** |
|----------------|-------------|
| 0              | Emergency   |
| 1              | Alerts      |
| 2              | Critical    |
| 3              | Errors      |
| 4              | Warning     |
| 5              | Notice      |
| 6              | Info        |
| 7              | Debug       |

When you specify the error code, it shows all messages from that code and above. For example, if you specify error code 2, it shows all messages with priority 2, 1 and 0.

You can also view logs for a specific time and date duration. You can use the `-- since` switch with a combination of `"yesterday"`, `"now"`, or a specific date and time `"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS"`.

An example of how to use the command:

```bash
journalctl --since "2022-12-22 12:20:00" --until yesterday
```

### Developing and Deploying Custom Docker Containers on Portenta X8

> To customize the Portenta X8, you can develop and deploy Docker containers. Start by provisioning your device as described in the [**Portenta X8 with Arduino Cloud**](#portenta-x8-with-arduino-cloud) section.

Reviewer 2: I find this really confusing. It seems that you need to connect to Arduino Cloud to deploy a container, which is not the case. Could we not rephrase this section with a different container example avoiding Arduino Cloud? It might be any of them, available on docker hub, but not the Arduino Cloud one

Reviewer 3: Understood, this was a bit tricky but it is now updated!

***For further details about Remote Procedure Call and its implementation, please refer to [this dedicated tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/python-arduino-data-exchange/).***

### Advanced Arduino-Linux Integration

Build Arduino sketches for real-time tasks like sensor communication and Fieldbus management. Then, send data to the cloud or remote servers using Linux's networking capabilities.

For example, the [Data Exchange Between Python® on Linux and an Arduino Sketch](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/python-arduino-data-exchange) tutorial will help you understand how to exchange sensor data between the Python® container embedded on Portenta X8 and an Arduino sketch.

If you are a more advanced user, you can check [Multi-Protocol Gateway With Portenta X8 & Max Carrier](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/multi-protocol-gateway) tutorial on developing your multi-protocol gateway. It aims to receive data from a sensor with the Arduino layer via MQTT protocol, take advantage of RPC to establish communication between Arduino and Linux, and then send the acquired data to *The Things Network* via *LoRaWAN®* managed by the Linux layer.

> ## Working With Portenta X8 Board Manager

Reviewer 2: Please mention again that this is not compulsory

Reviewer 3: Updated!

* [Portenta X8 Pinout](https://docs.arduino.cc/static/019dd9ac3b08f48192dcb1291d37aab9/ABX00049-full-pinout.pdf)

### Datasheet

The full datasheet is available and downloadable as PDF from the link below:
* [Portenta X8 Datasheet](https://docs.arduino.cc/resources/datasheets/ABX00049-datasheet.pdf)

### Schematics

The full schematics are available and downloadable as PDF from the link below:
* [Portenta X8 Schematics](https://docs.arduino.cc/resources/schematics/ABX00049-schematics.pdf)

### STEP Files

The full _STEP_ files are available and downloadable from the link below:
* [Portenta X8 STEP files](../../downloads/ABX00049-step.zip)

### Features Overview

Portenta X8 integrates two main programming experiences: the **Yocto Linux** and popular **Arduino** environments.

![Portenta X8 Features Overview](assets/portenta-x8-functionality-overview.png "Portenta X8 Features Overview")

To explore specific sections in more detail, please click on the links below that interest you:

* [Linux Environment](#linux-environment)
* [Arduino Environment](#arduino-environment)
* [Arduino Cloud](#portenta-x8-with-arduino-cloud)

> ### Portenta X8: Linux & Arduino Interoperability

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why this section is here. I think it would be relevant to have a small chapter explaining which kind of Linux OS is running on the board (with docker containers support) and then maybe mention as well of the possibility of using Arduino Sketches on M4. Just a brief introduction and then link the correspondent chapter and Portenta X8 fundamentals

Reviewer 3: Updated!

The Portenta X8 employs **Remote Procedure Call (RPC)** mechanisms to enable communication between the Linux system and the Arduino cores. RPC allows the two processors (M4 and M7 cores) to exchange data, with the M7 core handling data transfers between the M4 core running Arduino sketches and the Linux environment.

The communication uses **MessagePack-RPC**, a lightweight protocol for serialized data transfer, supporting various communication protocols like OpenAMP, SPI, and TCP/IP. This setup ensures efficient interaction between the Linux side and Arduino sketches without the complexity of traditional dual-core processing.

The Portenta X8 offers a powerful, versatile platform by combining Linux capabilities with Arduino’s ease of use. Users can deploy and manage device-independent applications using Docker containers while also taking advantage of Arduino’s rich ecosystem for embedded development. This hybrid environment supports flexible development, making it ideal for complex, multifunctional projects.

***For more in-depth details on fundamentals of the Portenta X8, please refer to this [documentation](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/x8-fundamentals/).***

> ## Portenta X8 OS Image Update

Reviewer 2: I'd recommend moving this section after the section named Arduino Linux Wizard Homepage

Reviewer 3: Updated!

It is recommended that you check every now and then to see if your Portenta X8 image version is up to date to have the latest security updates.

***To review the image version history, refer to the [__Portenta X8 firmware release notes__](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/x8-firmware-release-notes/).***

There are four ways to update your Portenta X8 are described:

* [Update for OS release V.399](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/image-flashing/#update-for-os-release-v399)

> * [Update through Out-of-the-box experience](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-x8/image-flashing/#update-through-out-of-the-box-experience)

Reviewer 2: Could we please rename everywhere Out-of-the-box with Arduino Linux Wizard?

Reviewer 3: Updated!

When successfully logged in, you will be asked to download the **Arduino Create Agent** if you have not done so yet. Click on **DOWNLOAD**.

![Create Agent Installation](assets/agent-installation.png "Create Agent Installation")

The agent will be installed on your computer. This activity might take a few minutes. Once installed, your Portenta X8 will be automatically detected by your PC after a few seconds.

![Portenta X8 successfully detected](assets/board-detection.png "Portenta X8 successfully detected")

Now click on **START CONFIGURATION**. The tool will install all the required add-ons to make your Portenta X8 work efficiently with your PC via serial communication.

You can now proceed to the setup of the board connectivity by clicking **OK, GOT IT**. 

![Out-of-the-box Connectivity Configuration](assets/ootb-wifi-config.png "Out-of-the-box Connectivity Configuration")

***If you face any issue with this flow or prefer to interact directly with your Portenta X8 through the command line, please refer to [this section](#working-with-linux) to learn how to connect with the board leveraging ADB service.***

> Once the setup is ready, let's open the Out-of-the-box page. Use the command line window and launch the TCP port forwarding setup command:

Reviewer 2: Are we sure we need to do this command? Unfortunately I don't have an X8 with me, but is it not possible to open the out of the box directly after the procedure under board-registration.arduino.cc?

Reviewer 3: I have rechecked this part, and it does transfer the user to the OOTB experience after completing the procedure on board-registration.arduino.cc. However, once the Portenta X8 is disconnected, the OOTB experience is not immediately accessible for post usage and requires running the command. I have updated this segment to clarify the direct transition to OOTB after board registration through the site and the process for accessing OOTB later using the command.

Once connected, you will get a notification confirming your Portenta X8 has connected to the selected network, and its LED will start blinking green.

Moreover, you can check the network you are connected to in the bottom left section of this dashboard.

![Out-of-the-box Wi-Fi® connection successful](assets/OOTB_wifi_connected.png "Out-of-the-box Wi-Fi® connection successful")

Now, you can click **OK** and be redirected to the Out-of-the-box homepage below.

![Out-of-the-box Homepage](assets/OOTB_homepage.png "Out-of-the-box Homepage")

***You can change your network by clicking on the Settings button and repeat the steps above.***

#### Arduino Linux Wizard Homepage

This web page is hosted on the Portenta X8 and allows a user to:

- Get board details
- [Configure Portenta X8 Wi-Fi®](#wi-fi-configuration)
- [Interact with the board through the embedded Python® Alpine Shell](#portenta-x8-with-python-alpine-shell)
- [Provision your device to Arduino Cloud](#portenta-x8-with-arduino-cloud)
- Manage the Linux distribution with the dedicated [Portenta X8 Board Manager](#portenta-x8-board-manager)

> 

Reviewer 2: Include here that it is possible to update the board OS via the Arduino Linux Wizard

Reviewer 3: Updated!

#### Portenta X8 with Python Alpine Shell

Click the **Shell** button to start using your Portenta X8 with Python-Alpine.

![Out-of-the-box Shell button](assets/OOTB_homepage_shell.png "Out-of-the-box Shell button")

This shell is running in a Python-Alpine container embedded in Portenta X8. You will find multiple examples under the directory `/root/examples` in this shell. Additionally, you can either add your own package through the command `apk add <packagename>` or start exploring the packages available online at [this link]( https://pkgs.alpinelinux.org/packages).

![Out-of-the-box Python-Alpine Shell](assets/OOTB_alpine_shell.png "Out-of-the-box Python-Alpine Shell")

## Portenta X8 with Arduino Cloud

> ***Note: this is an optional step. The Portenta X8 can also be used with a local IDE without an internet connection.***

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
***Note: this is an optional step. The Portenta X8 can also be used with locally without an internet connection.***
```

To do so, copying the shown code:

```bash
python3 examples/arduino_iot_cloud_example.py
```

And clicking on **Launch Example** is sufficient. An Alpine-Python shell will open, and you will have to paste the previous code here to launch the example.

![Launching dashboard example](assets/OOTB_example_dashboard_launch.png "Launching dashboard example")

Now, you can navigate to your dashboard [here](https://create.arduino.cc/iot/dashboards) to see your Portenta X8 LED blinking and the live temperature inside the microprocessor.

![Portenta X8 dashboard working](assets/cloud_dashboard_working.gif "Portenta X8 dashboard working")

***If you face any issues during the provisioning of your Portenta X8, feel free to repeat the procedure above.***

***If you would like to customize your Portenta X8 Things/Dashboards with your custom data, check [this section](#working-with-arduino-cloud) of the user manual.***

## Portenta X8 Board Manager

> ***Note: this is an optional step. Although the Portenta X8 Board manager opens a wide range of possibilities that are important for business applications, the Portenta X8 can be used for free without the need for any additional paid license***

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
***Note: this is an optional step enabling the possibility to perform remote over-the-air updates on your Portenta X8 OS and applications. To proceed, you need an Arduino Cloud for Business plan with Portenta X8 Manager.***
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
***Note: This is an optional step that enables the possibility of performing remote over-the-air updates on your Portenta X8 OS and applications. To proceed, you need an Arduino Cloud for Business plan with Portenta X8 Manager.***
```
Little tweak over suggestion, applying

## Required Hardware

* [Portenta X8](https://store.arduino.cc/products/portenta-x8) (x1)
* [USB-C® cable (USB-C® to USB-A cable)](https://store.arduino.cc/products/usb-cable2in1-type-c) (x1)
* Wi-Fi® Access Point or Ethernet with Internet access (x1)

## Required Software

* For Linux programming, leverage the latest Linux image available, and check [this section](#portenta-x8-os-image-update) to verify if your Portenta X8 has already been updated.
* For Arduino programming, leverage [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor), and the latest **Arduino Mbed OS Portenta Boards** Core > 3.0.1.

## Product Overview

The Portenta X8 combines the best of two approaches, offering the flexibility of Linux and the capability for real-time applications within the Arduino environment. Developers can execute real-time tasks while simultaneously handling high-performance processing on Linux cores.

So, let's have a look at its technical specifications.

### Board Architecture Overview

> Portenta X8 is a powerful, industrial-grade System on a Module that combines a Yocto Linux distribution with the well-known Arduino environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Portenta X8 is a powerful, industrial-grade System-on-Module (SoM) that combines a Yocto Linux distribution with the well-known Arduino environment.
```

* **Power management**: The Portenta X8 includes a power management integrated circuit (PMIC) to meet the demands of always-connected IoT devices.

### Pinout

![Portenta X8 Pinout](assets/ABX00049-pinout.jpg)

The full pinout is available and downloadable as PDF from the link below:
* [Portenta X8 Pinout](https://docs.arduino.cc/static/019dd9ac3b08f48192dcb1291d37aab9/ABX00049-full-pinout.pdf)

### Datasheet

The full datasheet is available and downloadable as PDF from the link below:
* [Portenta X8 Datasheet](https://docs.arduino.cc/resources/datasheets/ABX00049-datasheet.pdf)

### Schematics

The full schematics are available and downloadable as PDF from the link below:
* [Portenta X8 Schematics](https://docs.arduino.cc/resources/schematics/ABX00049-schematics.pdf)

### STEP Files

The full _STEP_ files are available and downloadable from the link below:
* [Portenta X8 STEP files](../../downloads/ABX00049-step.zip)

### Features Overview

Portenta X8 integrates two main programming experiences: the **Yocto Linux** and popular **Arduino** environments.

> ![Portenta X8 Features Overview](assets/portenta-x8-functionality-overview.png "Portenta X8 Features Overview")

Reviewer: <3
